# "Writing with AI" by Addison Eldin
## Top-Level
The "Writing with AI" activity attempts to help studnets understand the writing process, how AI "writes," and how they might make use of AI in their own writing practice. It takes as a presupposition that such AI, such as [ChatGPT](https://openai.com/blog/chatgpt), are here to stay, and that instructors can and should speak to the role of the technology in the writing process rather than assume we can keep it out of student view into the future. While I recognize the value of writing without AI, which can only realistically be enforced with a return to in-class writing exams, I think that teaching students how to use this technology effectively is both more viable and potentially more fruitful for their own future work, where they will have access to these tools in whatever contexts they find themselves writing in as they continue their college and post-college careers.

<span style="color:red">
The activity is intended to last for </span>

## Context
This activity is intended for writing-focused courses, namely first-year writing or digital writing courses. It is in response to ongoing conversations about the role of text generation AI in college courses, namely writing courses, as my background is in English composition and rhetoric.

At the University of Pittsburgh, where I am working on my PhD, there is a [resource page for faculty](https://teaching.pitt.edu/resources/chatgpt-resources-for-faculty/) that provides some useful starting points. In their list of "inclusive teaching strategies," they include: 

> "Develop assignments that cannot successfully be completed using AI tools. This might involve having students complete part or all of the assignment during class or designing assignments that include tasks that are outside of ChatGPT’s current capabilities. Examples might include assignments that require students to draw from recent events or class discussions or assignments that incorporate research and citations which you can then check."

While I think such an approach is useful, I want to come at it from the other angle: designing writing assignments that make use of ChatGPT to clarify how it works and can be utilized. For example, consider an article linked on the Pitt page, Eric Prochaska's ["Embrace the Bot: Designing Writing Assignments in the Face of AI."](https://www.facultyfocus.com/articles/course-design-ideas/embrace-the-bot-designing-writing-assignments-in-the-face-of-ai/) His third method for teaching with or around AI is an approach called "If you can't beat them, join them," which includes rhetorical analysis of AI-generated responses, revising such resposes, presenting on those responses, or otherwise interacting with results from AI text generation. I think this is in the right direction, but could go even further and do more to integrate student and AI writing.

Two articles from *Inside Higher Ed* provide more opportunities for working with students to make use of text generation AI. Susan D'Agostino, in her article ["ChatGPT Advice Academics Can Use Now"](https://www.insidehighered.com/news/2023/01/12/academic-experts-offer-advice-chatgpt), features suggestions from several professors, including this advice from NYU's Nancy Gleason:

> "Next, consider the tools relative to your course. What are the cognitive tasks students need to perform without AI assistance? When should students rely on AI assistance? Where can an AI aid facilitate a better outcome? Are there efficiencies in grading that can be gained? Are new rubrics and assignment descriptions needed? Will you add an AI writing code of conduct to your syllabus? Do these changes require structural shifts in timetabling, class size or number of teaching assistants?"

Note the emphasis on an integrative approach, identifying what skills students need in the context of the course, and what on the other hand might be reasonably offloaded. In an example from a class I am teaching right now, which is a literature course, I often ask students to do in-text citations for works included on the syllabus, with no expectation of a specific format like MLA or APA nor a works cited list. The reason is that the course is not intended to teach them proper citational formats, but rather to understand how to include important information in their writing such that I can verify and see the context of what they choose to include. The point is not more rigorous citational standards, but communicating where their information comes from. How might writing be taught to consider what is important for students to do, while helping them identify when and where AI is appropriate as part of that process. This perspective is echoed in Jeremy Weissman's less-rosy ["ChatGPT Is a Plague Upon Education"](https://www.insidehighered.com/views/2023/02/09/chatgpt-plague-upon-education-opinion), where he suggests the development of student "familiarity and even expertise with these programs, since such skills will likely be in demand in the job market."

Others in D'agostino's article provide fruitful suggestions. University of Mississippi's Robert Cummings suggests experimentation, a building of "AI literacy" so that students can understand the tools they have available as writers. North Carolina State University's Paul Fyfe gives assignments where students "cheat" through use of ChatGPT as an opportunity to start a conversation about the technology. College of Marin's Anna Mills suggests a back-and-forth between student expectations and understandings on the one hand, and outputs by ChatGPT on the other.

In each of these cases, I think there is a sense that the technology exists and will not vanish; it may very well be essential to future work in variety of job markets; and that there is an opportunity to help students understand how to intentionally make use of the technology as part of a broader writing process. Thus, this activity is intended to build on these ideas with a specific implementation.

<span style="color:red">

## Implementation
Despite the idiosyncratic context from which this activity arose, I think there are three broad principles that can help someone identify if this activity is a good fit for their classroom.

1. The course should, in part or in whole, speak to digital technology as at once social and technical, or *sociotechnical*. That is, some part of the class should speak to how ideas such as digital representation, digital computation, and/or encoding are relevant in human use of the technology.<sup>3</sup>  Relatedly, the course should spend some time prior to the activity discussing these concepts—whether in those terms or through a focus on programming and code—to prepare students for the conversation about the Strachey implementations that will prompt students' own creative work in developing a generator.<sup>4</sup> 
2. Students should, generally, have some experience with writing in college. The instructor will guide students through the basics of rhetorical analysis by considering the rhetorical context, purpose, and norms of a written genre, namely the love letter. Students who have taken a first-year writing course or otherwise learned about different kinds of academic writing—e.g. what differentiates an essay and a research paper—will be better situated to engage in this conversation. A class made up of students who are new to college and have no prior college writing experience might find this conversation more difficult, which could make the rest of the activity difficult.
3. While students do not need to know how to code, the instructor must have basic facility with at least one higher level programming language that enables the manipulation of text, e.g. Python or Javascript. The basic skills required include using strings, variables, and lists in conjunction with each other. Further, the instructor will need to be able to present the code and its outputs in sequence with text that contextualizes the code with some kind of projection technology.

If these three principles are met, I believe that the activity could be implemented into a course regardless of its home department. While the rhetorical analysis part of the assignment might seem limiting in terms of instructor comfort with guiding the discussion, I think that the questions provided and the instructor's own awareness of the contexts, purposes, and norms of written genres in their own field are sufficient for facilitating the rhetorical analysis in the activity.
 
## Instructional Materials
All instructional materials for this activity—including an instructional guide, a student program and its implementation in code, and a template generator in Markdown and Python using Jupyter Notebooks—are available via a GitHub repository (https://github.com/addeldin/genre-generators).
</span>